[Doc] New Opcodes for tapscript (#949)
ElementsProject/elements: doc/tapscript_opcodes.md

- Stack element size limit: The existing limit of maximum 520 bytes per stack element remains, during the stack machine operations. There is an additional policy rule limiting the initial push size to 80 bytes.

## Additional resource limits changes in Elements

- New added opcodes `OP_MULTISCALAREXPVERIFY` for `k` base multi scalar exponentiation is counted as `50*k` units towards the SIGOPS budget. If the operation requires extra script_budget, the user must add additional witness elements to make sure that the script executes within the desired budget.

# New Opcodes for additional functionality:

## Multi-byte op-codes

We suggest the use of multi-byte opcodes for proper classification of additional opcodes and for limiting the number of OP_SUCCESSx used. In particular, a multi-byte opcode is a variable-length opcode containing an OP_SUCCESSx followed by a CscriptNum push with minimal representation. If the next opcode after OP_SUCCESS is not a push code or if the number is not a CScriptNum with minimal form, the script fails. The number pushed by the push operation serves as a selector for the operation to perform on the OP_SUCCESSx.

> 1. **Streaming Opcodes for streaming hashes**: There is an existing MAX_SCRIPT_ELEMENT_SIZE is 520 bytes, that is the maximum message size that can OP_SHA256 can operate on. This allows hashing on more than 520 bytes while still preserving the existing security against resource exhaustion attacks. The proposal for this is still under discussion in https://github.com/ElementsProject/elements/pull/817. We suggest the latest scheme suggested by Russel O Connor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Streaming Opcodes for streaming hashes**: There is an existing MAX_SCRIPT_ELEMENT_SIZE is 520 bytes, that is the maximum message size that OP_SHA256 can operate on. This allows hashing on more than 520 bytes while still preserving the existing security against resource exhaustion attacks. The proposal for this is still under discussion in https://github.com/ElementsProject/elements/pull/817. We suggest the latest scheme suggested by Russel O'Connor
```

   -  Define OP_SUCCESS200 as a multi-byte opcode OP_STREAMINGHASH with the following semantics. Execute the push opcode following OP_STREAMINGHASH, if the opcode is not a push opcode, fail.

>    -  Pop the stack pop as minimal CScriptNum as n.

Reviewer 2: "Pop" used twice

      6. If n=5, interpret as `OP_RIPEMD160FINALIZE` to pop a RIPEMD160 context and bytestring and push a RIPEMD160 hash value after adding the bytestring and completing the padding.
      7. If n=6, interpret `OP_HASH256INITIALIZE` to pop a bytestring and push HASH256 context creating by adding the bytestring to the initial HASH256 context.
      8. If n=7, interpret as `OP_HASH256UPDATE` to pop a HASH256 context and bytestring and push an updated context by adding the bytestring to the data stream being hashed.
      9. If n=8, interpret as `OP_HASH256FINALIZE` to pop a HASH256 context and bytestring and push a HASH256 hash value after adding the bytestring and completing the padding.
      10. If n=9, interpret `OP_HASH160INITIALIZE` to pop a bytestring and push HASH160 context creating by adding the bytestring to the initial HASH160 context.
      11. If n=10, interpret as `OP_HASH160UPDATE` to pop a HASH160 context and bytestring and push an updated context by adding the bytestring to the data stream being hashed.

>       12. If n=11, interpret as `OP_HASH160FINALIZE` to pop a HASH160 context and bytestring and push a HASH160 hash value after adding the bytestring and completing the padding.

Reviewer 2: What is the context when hash algorithms besides SHA256 would be needed ?

Author: The goal is to be as expressive as possible without much additional cost. Since elements already has these implemented, adding support would not be hard. I don't know where this might be needed, but here are some guesses that I can make.
- sha256d for verifying bitcoin merkle-root(I need to double-check if bitcoin actually uses sha256d for this). 
- Usecases involving verification of some p2sh script hash.
- Users may want a 20 byte digest for saving fees instead of a 32 byte one.

Reviewer 2: fair enough

Author: In favor for simplicity, I think we should go with your suggestion of only requiring sha256

      4. If `n=3`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTASSET` Push the `nAsset` as a tuple, first push the assetID(32), followed by the prefix(1)
      5. If `n=4`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTVALUE` Push the `nValue` as a tuple, value(8, 32) followed by prefix,
      6. If `n=5`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTSSCRIPTPUBKEY` Push the scriptPubkey(35) onto the stack.
      7. If `n=6`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTSEQUENCE` Push the `nSequence`(4) as little-endian number. 
      8. If `n=7`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTISSUANCE` Push the assetIssuance information(74-130) if the asset has issuance, otherwise push an empty vector
      9. If `n=8`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTINDEX` Push the current input index(4) as little-endian onto the stack
      10. If `n=9`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTANNEX` Push the annex onto the stack where the annex includes the prefix(0x50). If the annex does not exist, push an empty vector
      11. Otherwise fail.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS202` as a multi-byte opcode `OP_INSPECTCURRENTINPUT` with the following semantics. Execute the push opcode following `OP_INSPECTCURRENTINPUT`, if the opcode is not a push opcode, fail. 

>       - Pop the stack pop as minimal `CScriptNum` as `n`. All the implementation is exactly the same as `OP_INSPECTINPUT`, but uses the current input instead of reading the input from stack. The names of the `OP_INSPECTINPUTx` would be replaced by `OP_INSPECTCURRENTINPUTx`

Reviewer 2: Can be substituted with `OP_INSPECTINPUTINDEX OP_INSPECTINPUTx`, is it worth it to add 9 opcodes to save 2 bytes ?

Author: Fair point. Maybe we don't want to do this.

>       - Pop the stack pop as minimal `CScriptNum` as `n`. All the implementation is exactly the same as `OP_INSPECTINPUT`, but uses the current input instead of reading the input from stack. The names of the `OP_INSPECTINPUTx` would be replaced by `OP_INSPECTCURRENTINPUTx`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Pop the stack as minimal `CScriptNum` as `n`. The implementation is exactly the same as `OP_INSPECTINPUT`, but uses the current input instead of reading the input from stack. The names of the `OP_INSPECTINPUTx` would be replaced by `OP_INSPECTCURRENTINPUTx`
```

      3. If `n=2`, `OP_LE32TOLE64` pop the stack as a 4 byte signed LE. Push the corresponding 8 byte LE number. Cannot fail, useful for conversion of version/sequence.
      4. Otherwise, fail.

5. **Crypto**: In order to allow more complex operations on elements, we introduce the following new crypto-operators.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS207` as a multi-byte opcode `OP_CRYPTO` with the following semantics. Execute the push opcode following `OP_CRYPTO`, if the opcode is not a push opcode, fail. 
   - Pop the stack pop as minimal `CScriptNum` as `n`.
      1. If `n=0`, `OP_ECMULSCALAREXPVERIFY`, pop the top element as `k`. Then pop next elements as points `G1`(first), `G2`(second)
      ..`Gk`. Next pop `k` scalars `x1`, `x2`... `xk`. Finally pop result element as as point `Q`. Assert `x1G1+x2G2+x3G3.. xkGk == Q` This counts as `k*50` towards budget sigops. If any of `G_i`,`Q` is point at infinity fail.
      2. If `n=1`, `OP_ECNEGATE` pop a point `G`(33 bytes) from stack, push `-G` onto the stack.
      3. If `n=2`, `OP_PUSH256NUM_0`, Push 256 bit scalar value 0.

>       4. If `n=3`, `OP_PUSH256NUM_`, Push 256 bit scalar value 1. 

Reviewer 2: should be `OP_PUSH256NUM_1`

>       5. If `n=4`, `OP_SCALARADD` pop the top two stack elements(32 bytes)(`a` and `b`) as scalars, return (`(a+b)%n`) where `n` is order of secp256k1. Note that we do not error is `a>=n` or `b>=n`.

Reviewer 2: should be "do not error if" rather than "is" ?

2. **Transaction Introspection codes**: Transaction introspection is already possible in elements script by use of `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACKVERIFY`, however the current solutions are really expensive in applications like [covenants](https://github.com/sanket1729/covenants-demo). Therefore, we are not adding any new functionality by supporting introspection, only making it easier to use. The warning still remains the same as with covenants, if the user is inspecting data from parts of the transaction that are not signed, the script can cause unexpected behavior.
For opcodes that inspect data that is not committed in sighash, introspection is safe because any changes to the witness data would cause wtxid to change and it would revalidate the tx again.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS199` as `OP_INSPECTINPUT` with the following semantics: Pop two minimal `CScriptNum`s from stack. The first number `n` denotes the type of introspection, and the second number `idx `denotes the position of input to inspect. Immediately abort if `idx` is out of bounds.

>       1. If `n=0`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTSPENDTYPE` Push 1 byte "spend_type" onto the stack. spend_type (1) is equal to `(ext_flag * 2) + annex_present` as defined in [Modified BIP-341 SigMsg for Elements](https://gist.github.com/roconnor-blockstream/9f0753711153de2e254f7e54314f7169)

Reviewer 3: I think it might be simpler to not name these since they aren't really "opcodes" now.

      2. If `n=1`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTOUTPOINTFLAG` Push the outpoint_flag(1) as defined in [Modified BIP-341 SigMsg for Elements](https://gist.github.com/roconnor-blockstream/9f0753711153de2e254f7e54314f7169)
      3. if `n=2`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTOUTPOINT` Push the outpoint as a tuple. First push the `txid`(32) of the `prev_out`, followed by a 4 byte push of `vout`
      4. If `n=3`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTASSET` Push the `nAsset` onto the stack as two elements. The first push the assetID(32), followed by the prefix(1)
      5. If `n=4`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTVALUE` Push the `nValue` as a tuple, value(8, 32) followed by prefix,
      6. If `n=5`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTSSCRIPTPUBKEY` Push the scriptPubkey(35) onto the stack.
      7. If `n=6`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTSEQUENCE` Push the `nSequence`(4) as little-endian number.
      8. If `n=7`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTISSUANCE` Push the assetIssuance information(74-130) if the asset has issuance, otherwise push an empty vector
      9. If `n=8`, `OP_INSPECTINPUTANNEX` Push the annex onto the stack where the annex includes the prefix(0x50). If the annex does not exist, push an empty vector

>       10. Otherwise fail.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we shoud "otherwise end the script with success" so that we can softfork in new data?

Author: It is somewhat risky. If the user does some manipulation on the stack to figure out which value `n` to use and some makes an error in it, it could result in loss of funds. 

I guess the same could be said for `k` in `k on n` multisig. So, I feel safe in changing it to success.

      6. Otherwise, abort

5. **Crypto**: In order to allow more complex operations on elements, we introduce the following new crypto-operators.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS203` as `OP_ECMULSCALAREXPVERIFY`, pop the top element as `k`. Then pop next elements as points `G1`(first), `G2`(second)
      ..`Gk`. Next pop `k` scalars `x1`, `x2`... `xk`. Finally pop result element as as point `Q`. Assert `x1G1+x2G2+x3G3.. xkGk == Q` This counts as `k*50` towards budget sigops. If any of `G_i`,`Q` is point at infinity fail.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS204` as `OP_TAPTWEAK` with the following semantics. Pop the first element as point `P`, second element as script blob `S`. Push the Taptweak on the top of stack `Q = P + H(P||S)*G`. If `|S| > MAX_ELEMENT_SIZE`, the user should use the streaming opcodes to compute the Hash function.

3. **Signed 64-bit arithmetic opcodes:** Current operations on `CScriptNum` as limited to 4 bytes and are difficult to compose because of minimality rules. having a fixed width little operations with 8 byte signed operations helps doing calculations on amounts which are encoded as 8 byte little endian.

>    - When dealing with overflows, we explicitly return the success bit as a `CScriptNum` at the top of the stack and the result being the second element from the top. If the operation overflows, first the operands are pushed onto the stack followed by success bit. \[`a_second` `a_top`\] overflows, the stack state after the operation is \[`a_second` `a_top 0`\] and if the operation does not overflow, the stack state is \[`res 1`\].

Reviewer 3: nit: missing a couple `s between `a_top` and `0`

   - Define `OP_SUCCESS205` as `OP_ADD64`: pop the first number(8 byte LE) as `b` followed another pop for `a`(8 byte LE). Push a + b onto the stack. Push 1 `CScriptNum` if there is no overflow. Overflow behavior defined above.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS206` as `OP_SUB64`: pop the first number(8 byte LE) as `b` followed another pop for `a`(8 byte LE). Push a - b onto the stack. Push 1 `CScriptNum` if there is no overflow. Overflow behavior defined above.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS207` as `OP_MUL64`: pop the first number(8 byte LE) as `b` followed another pop for `a`(8 byte LE). Push `a*b` onto the stack. Push 1 `CScriptNum` if there is no overflow. Overflow behavior defined above.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS208` as `OP_DIV64`: pop the first number(8 byte LE) as `b` followed another pop for `a`(8 byte LE). First push remainder `a%b`(must be non-negative and less than |b|) onto the stack followed by quotient(`a//b`) onto the stack. Abort if `b=0`. Push 1 `CScriptNum` if there is no overflow. Overflow behavior defined above.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS209` as `OP_LESSTHAN64`(cannot fail!): pop the first number(8 byte LE) as `b` followed another pop for `a`(8 byte LE). Push ` a < b`.

>    - Define `OP_SUCCESS210` as `OP_LESSTHANOREQUAL64`(cannot fail!): pop the first number(8 byte LE) as `b` followed another pop for `a`(8 byte LE). Push ` a <= b`.

Reviewer 3: I'm torn between having the "less than or equal" opcodes and requiring the user do `GREATERTHAN` `NOT`. What do others think?

Reviewer 4: I think there's a decent amount of value in just having GT in terms of minimalism, but in practice having both GT/LT should be able to yield more efficient scripts...

Author: The concern here is that we are consuming opcodes(already up to 222/254) and we don't want to run out of them in future upgrades. 

The previous version of this doc had multi-byte opcodes(opcodes for ec operations, scalar exps etc) which were removed in favor of implementation simplicity.

   - Define `OP_SUCCESS217` as `OP_NOT64`(cannot fail!): pop the first number(8 byte LE) as `a`. Push `~a`.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS218` as `OP_LSHIFT`: pop the first number as `CScriptNum` `l`(abort if l < 0 or l > 63) followed another pop for `a` (8 byte LE). Push `a << l` preserving the sign bit. `(-1 << 3) = - 8` returns fixed 64 bits, extra-bits are discarded and sign is preserved.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS219` as `OP_RSHIFT`: pop the first number as `CScriptNum` `r`(abort if r < 0 or r > 63) followed another pop for `a` (8 byte LE). Push `a >> r`.(Sign bit is preserved).

4. **Conversion opcodes:** Methods for conversion from `CScriptNum` to `8-byte LE`, `4-byte LE`.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS220` as `OP_SCIPTNUMTOLE64`: pop the stack as minimal `CSciptNum`, push 8 byte signed LE corresponding to that number.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS221` as `OP_LE64TOSCIPTNUM`: pop the stack as a 8 byte signed LE. Convert to `CScriptNum` and push it, abort on fail.
   - Define `OP_SUCCESS222` as `OP_LE32TOLE64`: pop the stack as a 4 byte signed LE. Push the corresponding 8 byte LE number. Cannot fail, useful for conversion of version/sequence.

6. **Changes to existing Opcodes**:

>    - Add `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` and `OP_CHECKSIGFROMSTACKVERIFY` to follow the semantics from bip340-342 when witness program is v1.

Reviewer 3: How about we remove `CHECKSIGFROMSTACK` and leave only the VERIFY variant?

Author: I don't feel strongly about it. It's not additional code complexity so might as well have it?

Reviewer 4: I agree that both seems reasonable -- although I thought CHECKSIGFROMSTACK was already part of elements?

Author: They are part of elements, but we need to modify them to use BIP340-342 type schnorr signatures. Currently, this uses ECDSA sigs
